# 2. JavaScript/Typescript as primary platform independent scripting language for custom actions
**Date:** 22-10-2024

## Status
Proposed

## Context
To allow for shared custom tasks/steps/actions functionality to be shared between different ci-cd platforms, a platform independent scripting language needs to be chosen. The platform independent scripting language should preferably be supported by all of the considered ci-cd platforms. If that is not possible, the order of importance is currently: GitHub, Azure DevOps, GitLab, Jenkins.

Potential ci-cd platforms considered for compatibility: Azure DevOps, GitHub, GitLab and Jenkins. All platforms support custom tasks/steps/actions and allow for bash scripts to be executed as part of it. All platforms except for Jenkins support custom tasks/steps/actions to be made in JavaScript/TypeScript.

The operating system of the ci-cd runners has impact on the choice of scripting language aswell. Bash scripts can only be executed on Linux-based runners, while JavaScript/TypeScript is OS idependent. All of the considered platforms support both Linux-based OS's and Windows-based OS's as ci-cd runner.

Bash script most likely require a (partial) git checkout of the repository holding the bash scripts, while JavaScript/TypeScript scripts can in addition also be obtained via a package manager like NPM.

## Decision
JavaScript/Typescript should be used as primary platform independent scripting language. The benefits that JavaScript/TypeScript offers outweighs the incompatibility with Jenkins. In particular the ease of using existing libraries and being able to lean on a package manager to have consistent behavior between all ci-cd platform and between client setup's, push the choice towards JavaScript/TypeScript over Bash.

Bash scripts will require their dependencies to be available on the ci-cd runner. This is likely to cause issues with missing dependencies or version issues between not only ci-cd platforms, but also between different client setup's. JavaScript/TypeScript can lean on a package manager to manage dependencies.

JavaScript/TypeScript is by far the most commonly used language for custom GitHub actions. This makes it quite easy to make use existing libraries. With bash scripts these libraries or existing tools would need to be installed on the ci-cd runner without any declarative description of which library or tools with what version need to be installed.

JavaScript/TypeScript allows for (unit)tests to be included as part of the library. This helps with preventing unintended changes/errors during maintenance and development.

## Consequences
Existing custom tasks/steps/actions should be rewritten to JavaScript/TypeScript over time and be properly packaged and versioned.

Requires NodeJS/NPM to be available in ci-cd runners.